To Explain or to Predict? Shmueli2010
Since the emergence of early statistical frameworks, our comprehension of data has advanced dramatically. From basic correlation analysis of empirical observations graunt1662natural and progressing to sophisticated modeling of complete languages brown2020language and biological structures jumper2021highly, Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems have developed to support virtually all domains of human endeavor. They have also evolved from highly interpretable systems, where we can understand the role of the few variables in the prediction model, to so-called black-box models, where the individual contribution of each datapoint is submerged in the billions of parameters that contribute to the model. indeed, as the prediction became more accurate, the size and complexity of all models grew accordingly, as shown in Figure , trading off interpretability for predictive capability.

However, recent research regarding neural networks (NNs), the most powerful black-box methods, interpretability has demonstrated interesting capabilities that in no way impute model accuracy. These methods are based on the activation of neurons, in the same way as we observe a human brain. Using techniques and data sets, it is possible to associate certain parts of a NN with a behavior, a computation or a concept. It has thus become possible to know, e.g. when a language model talks about politics kim2025linear, without interfering with the capabilities of the model in question.

This Master's thesis therefore bears the following research questions: Is it possible to transpose NN interpretability techniques to bio-statistics, and how effective these new techniques become?

Biology is the broad study of living things, from cells to evolution, disease and the effect of molecules on the human body. The latter is of particular interest to us, as it is one of the main applications of bio-statistics, the sub-branch of statistics that applies statistical methods to the study of living organisms. It's relatively easy to collect information, i.e. about patients and to record and study the effects of, say, drugs on them. This is called experimentation, and produces a statistically analyzable data set. Today, this process, when optimized, is akin to our clinical trials: a set of patients selected to take part in a study on the effect of a drug. The aim is to discover whether the observed effect is absolutely attributable to the drug, and whether there are no undesirable side-effects.
